Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, as always Ricardo Lob. And
today I'm joined by Dr Monte Johnson. He's a
professor in the Department of Philosophy at the University
of California, San Diego. He teaches and researches GRE
Roman philosophy and its influence on the history of
philosophy and science. And today we're talking mostly about
some aspects of the philosophy of Aristotle, democritus and
also Greek Roman philosophy. So Monte, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here. My, my favorite
thing to do, talk philosophy.
And I guess that probably was
with you. It's an honor to do it with
you, Ricardo.
Well, I really appreciate that. So, and I guess
that probably one of the things in philosophy that
you love talking about the most would be Aristotle,
right? So, uh what got you interested in Aristotle
to start off with? And what are perhaps some
of the aspects of his philosophy that interest you
the most? And then we can get into some
specifics here.
Well, uh give you, give you a tiny uh
intellectual biography here. I actually started out uh getting,
getting interested in Nietzsche uh in my Catholic high
school. Um AND I was reading Nietzsche and realized
I don't understand anything he's talking about because all
of these Greek philosophers. So in, in college, I
need to study Greek philosophy so that I can
sort of work my way through the history up
to Nietzsche, which I really wanted to understand. But
then I started doing Greek philosophy and um never
got beyond it, found so many interesting things to
do there that II I just sort of stalled
out in Greek philosophy, but you start doing Greek
philosophy and you realize, well, everybody keeps talking about
Aristotle and you've got to understand what's going on
with, with Aristotle, particularly if you wanna know the
earlier history of philosophy. So that's what initially interested
me in Aristotle was just trying to figure out
what's going on with, with Greek philosophy in general.
And then I just found so many interesting things
within Aristotle that, that, that became all absorbing and,
and almost all of my other philosophical projects have,
you know, sort of started out with things that
I, that I found in Aristotle and started investigating
further and realized, OK, well, I need to understand
these criticisms he's making of materialism or whatever. So
then you get further into democritus and epicurus and,
and others and so on. So um it, it,
it's really just because he's so um central to,
to, to Greek philosophy.
Yeah, you know, I left a little bit when
you mentioned Nietzsche because back when I first read
Nietzsche, uh, a little bit prior to that, I
had already read a little bit of Plato, but
then I started reading Nietzsche and I was like,
damn it. I have to go back and live
and read a little bit more of Greek philosophy.
Yeah, that's right. Even though, you know, he Nietzsche
doesn't really say that much about Aristotle directly, as
much as he does about, about Plato and Socrates
and so forth. But, you know, if you're wondering
what interests me, you know, my, my deeper interest
in Aristotle, like what, what I found when I
got there, I mean, one thing is that he's
one of these philosophers that actually contributed massively to
science. Um And so, you know, the, the the
two areas he's most known for, there would be,
you know, his logic and biology, basically two fields
of science that, that he completely founded and he
contributed to almost all other areas of science as
it was conceived in antiquity. Um But especially those
those two, but also just his, his general approach
to science and, and conceiving of a kind of
philosophy of science, almost a scientific method and his
treatment of his predecessors and kind of a development
of a, of a dialectical method, almost like history
of philosophy. Um All of all of those things
are, are so interesting even before you start talking
about his subsequent influence on the history of science
and the history of philosophy. Um SO that, you
know, even even today, largely the terminology that we're
using in philosophy and to a, a pretty big
extent, the formulation of problems that we still have
um are are due to Aristotle. So, you know,
everything from, you know, the term metaphysics itself originally
conceived of as a, as a editorial term for
positioning works within his corpus. Um Two great problems
I was looking at the uh there's a Oxford
handbook of Metaphysics that came out a couple of
years ago and reading its introduction and the, the
editors tell us that uh there's this, this great
stuff happening in metaphysics now, like, you know, uh
modal metaphysics and category theory and, and so on.
And it's like all these things that Aristotle, you
know, initially took up and, and, and gave us,
gave us some of the first positions in. So,
you know, even if you're interested just in contemporary
philosophy and understanding why it's using the terms. It
is why it has the problems that it has.
Um YOU sort of have to have to know
something about Aristotle and, and, and how he got
a lot of this, this stuff going. So that's
that, you know, those, those are the main reasons
I'm interested in him. It's, it's hard not to
be if, if, if you're serious about philosophy and
especially history of philosophy.
Yeah. And I guess that particularly for these older
ancient philosophers, a very frustrating thing sometimes is that,
um, some of their literary works are lost, perhaps
some of them lost forever. And I noticed that
again when going back and reading some of their
works because of Nietzsche, the works of Eric Le,
for example, I mean, there is nothing there pretty,
pretty much so. But, uh, and that's interesting also
because you told me before we, they interviewed that
you're working on reconstructing a lost work of Aristotle
or Aristotle entitled Pro Practicus. So what by the
way, what do we mean by lost work here?
What does that mean
exactly? Yeah. So um you know, we look at
the, the works that we have inherited what we
call the Aristotle corpus and they're based on medieval
manuscripts of works that were attributed to Aristotle. And
these are works that essentially were continuously copied by
hand from antiquity through the middle ages and, and
made it into the renaissance in the age of
printing. And so we have this, this corpus of
works and, and you know, within that corpus, uh
we consider some of the works dubious meaning. Scholars
don't really agree whether it can be attributed to
Aristotle. We have other works that are spurious, which
basically means scholars agree that we can't attribute it
to Aristotle. And then we have all of the
works and the most famous works that we uh
attribute to him like the politics, the physics, the
metaphysics, uh the poetics, the Nick and mckeon ethics
and so forth. All of these, you know, are
the core of our Aristotle corpus. But when we
look at ancient lists of Aristotle's works, and there
are three ancient lists of his works. It actually
doesn't correspond very well to our Aristotle corpus. Um
And so we notice a lot of titles on
those lists that are not the same as works
that we have and uh entire genres of works
that, you know, weren't copied continually. And so haven't
made it into our contemporary Aristotle corpus. So by
lost work, we basically mean a work that was
either on an ancient list of Aristotle's writings or
that other ancients referred to, you know, by a
certain title and, and, and so forth. Um AND
then sometimes quoted or paraphrased. Uh And so we
know that these works existed and that, and that
they had them, but they just didn't make it
down uh to our day. And that, that, that's
another issue uh that we can discuss is, you
know, why we have the works we have and
why we don't have some other works we have.
It's a big issue when we, if we, if
we talk about Democrats, for example, but by lost
works, we basically mean works that existed in antiquity
and that we don't uh have anymore. And for
Aristotle, there are a lot of these works. In
fact, I think what we have is probably something
like a quarter of what he wrote, or at
least what was attributed to him in antiquity. I
mean, may maybe we have something like a half,
but probably more like a quarter. And one thing
that we are entirely missing is all of the
works that Aristotle intended to publish all of his
popular works. So he wrote a lot of dialogues
just like Plato. In fact, he wrote four dialogues
that he gave the exact same title as Plato.
So he wrote a symposium, he wrote a Nexus,
he wrote a statesman and so on. And all
of these dialogues, which there's a lot of ancient
praise for Aristotle's, the golden flow of Aristotle's words
and so forth, which is referring to these popular
works and these dialogues, nobody could describe the works
that we now have of the Aristotle Corpus as
a golden flow of rhetorically beautiful speech. But he
wrote dialogues like Plato did that were extremely popular
in antiquity. In fact, it's possible that that most
of Aristotle's reputation in antiquity uh before the later
uh later antiquity, when you know, the Aristotle commentators,
business was really going. Um But but earlier than
that, and in the hellenistic age, his reputation was
largely on the basis of these dialogues. So one
of the dialogues that he wrote, one of the
popular works he wrote was called the Protreptic. And
that means uh you know, to give it a
Latin translation, exhortation, exhortation to what exhortation to philosophy.
So it's designed to be a work that encourages
people to do philosophy, do philosophy as opposed to
what while doing either another kind of philosophy. So
he's encouraging you to a certain kind of philosophy
or do philosophy in preference to other kinds of
activities like uh politics, business, uh strategy, uh things
like that law. Um A actually what he comes
around to saying is that if you want to
do any of those, you sh you can enhance
it and do it in a, in a real
way by also doing philosophy. So this is AAA
work that did not survive in medieval manuscripts, but
it was excerpted heavily uh by some, some later
ancient writers and in, in such a way that
we can take these excerpts, study them very closely
and even arrange them into a plausible order that
we think was the order of the original work.
And then we can actually say something about Aristotle's
popular works, the so called exoteric works as opposed
all of the works that we have are actually
esoteric works, meaning meaning works designed for use within
his school. Uh We, we often lazily call them
something like notes. Uh And it's not usually clear
whether it's meant notes that the teacher is using
to lecture or notes that his students are taking
down as he's lecturing or were they initially written
by him and then revised by students or initially
written by students and revised by him. Uh We,
we we we don't really know any of that.
But what we know is that these are highly
technical works intended for use within a school and
not the kind of polished literary works that, that
we have with play doh uh or other contemporaries
of Aristotle like is Socrates. So it's just interesting
to get it, get an insight into that literary
accomplishment. And then there are certain things we can
actually say, we can inform things about our reading
of the Aristotle corpus. And that esoteric works on
the basis of having a clearer theory about the,
the exoteric ones like the paretic.
So to get into some of uh the aspects
of Aristotle's philosophy that you've explored in your work
more specifically and to try to perhaps tie a
little bit to modern conceptualizations of science, for example,
uh did Aristotle defend in any way, the idea
of scientific unity? And by the way, what does
scientific unity mean exactly?
Well, that is, so that's a, that's a big
question. Um I'm, I'm, I'm very happy to talk
about it. So first thing I think that first
way to approach this issue is to realize that,
you know, for Aristotle science, uh that's the term
we use to translate his term, you know, epistemic
where we get the term epistemology, it's really a
state of mind or, or even a state of,
of character. It's an, it's an intellectual virtue that
people possess. OK. So when we, when we talk
about science fundamentally, don't mean something that's like out
there in objects or like in on papyrus scrolls
or on the internet or something. It's, it's actually
a condition of a mind. OK? And, and, and
in an ability to do something, an ability to
prove things, an ability to demonstrate things. OK. So
there is, there is scientific unity in the sense
that science is a modification of a soul and
every scientific soul is capable of doing something capable
of proving something. Now, in different domains, there are
different standards of proof or demonstration and different methods
used uh to build up to these proofs. And
that's where we start getting uh divergences um in
and, and, and we get away from the unity
of science in a, in a single mind into
um the way that this unified mind approaches various
kinds of objects which are themselves quite different and,
and of a different nature. So, um and, and
we can continue to talk about scientific unity even
when we talk about how he approaches those different
kinds of objects. But there, it's, it's, it's interesting
the way he divides things up because he, he
does so quite differently. So we look at his,
his overall division of the sciences and classification of
the sciences. The first and most important division is
between practical philosophy on the one hand and theoretical
philosophy on the other hand, OK. And theoretical philosophy
studies objects that we want to know their causes,
whether or not we can have any further effect
from that knowledge, produce any other kind of effect.
So things that we just want to know about
and this basically comes down for him to you
know God or theology, uh the gods, the divine
uh mathematical entities like arithmetical or geometric objects and
natural science. So uh everything from the stars, moon
and sun to the nature of the earth and
the environment, to plants and animals, all of those
things, we want to know about their causes, just,
just to contemplate them, we might be able to
do something else with that knowledge. But the knowledge,
the key thing is that the knowledge is valuable
even if we can't do anything else with it.
And that differentiates it from the practical sciences where
here we judge their success on the effects. We
wanna know their, the causes in these various domains
in order to produce certain effects. So we don't
wanna just know about happiness or know about the
good. We wanna actually be happy and uh have
the goods and we don't wanna just know about
the causes of good government. We actually want to
um participate in, in good government and build good
government and live under good government and similar to,
you know, medicine or economics or anything else. We
don't wanna just know what it is to be
healthy. We actually want to be healthy or know
what it takes to make money, we want to
actually have a lot of it. Uh And so
then you start to get different standards for what
constitutes knowledge in these other kinds of domains. Now,
another aspect of the unity of science is AAA
unity of methods that applies even to these theoretical
and practical ones, which involves sort of stages of
scientific knowledge. So a stage at which empirical facts
are gathered. And this is a process he calls,
you know, history, inquiry or investigation. And we establish
what the facts are in the various domains. And
then we search for ways to explain those facts
that is we search for causes. And ultimately, we
try to trace these causes back to principles, principles
that we accept as, as self evident or there
are sort of like definitions and that operating with
those principles or definitions we can through chains of,
of reasoning, arrive at conclusions that constitute the phenomena
that we observe that we, that we want to
explain. So, you know, that's, that's a kind of
outline of, of, of how any science will work.
Since a science is a mind's ability to prove
something, then this is how this is how you
would ultimately prove it. But within laying out that
that kind of method or that that standard for
scientific knowledge, he talks about different domains of scientific
knowledge and he actually creates a kind of prohibition
on domain crossing or kind crossing explanations. So he,
he wants to, to tidy up where uh how
the observed phenomena that we're explaining relates to the
kind of principles being used. And he looks at
his predecessors and he sees them trying to just
use a couple of principles to explain all of
the phenomena in all kinds of various domains. And
he thinks we need, we need a tighter relationship
and more specific principles. And so he actually says,
we should not be able to just freely cross,
for example, from principles about arithmetic or geometry immediately
to the explanation say of ethical matters, uh which
he kind of conceives of like Pythagorean is doing
this. They think that numbers are the principles of
everything. So they would explain even marriage injustice on
the basis of these being like the numbers three
or four and things like that. And he thinks,
well, arithmetic principles can explain arithmetic facts and, but
we're gonna need ethical principles in order to explain
ethical facts and, and we should not, we should
not have a sense of scientific unity. That's so
tight that, that we just expect a few principles
to explain uh everything whatsoever. Uh So that's uh
one thing that he lays out and it's an
extremely important and influential aspect of his thought that
being said as he is laying out this prohibition
on kind crossing or doma domain crossing explanations. Immediately,
he says, but there are certain exceptions to this
and it, it's almost as if the exceptions end
up constituting the rule. So for example, we if
we're explaining a meteorological phenomenon like the rainbow or
the halo, then we're gonna need theorems from a
natural science like optics in order to explain these
phenomena. But the theorems of optics are themselves based
on geometric principles. So ultimately, the explanation for why
the rainbow is a semi circle or why the
halo is a circle has to do with geometric
principles. So we do, we do cross kinds from
meteorology all the way to geometry and that explanation.
But but we have these standards for keeping the
phenomena tied to the principle. So that's a very
long winded answer to the to the question. Ultimately,
yes, science is a completely unified thing and it's
an ability to prove and it's something in a
mind. But because the objects that are being explained
are so diverse, this unity breaks down pretty, pretty
quickly. But it, it can be reestablished because there
are lots of general principles that we need in
order in order to explain everything. And there are
geometric principles involved even in explaining things like justice.
So we need a proportional concept of equality in
order to explain distributive justice for example. But it's
a much more sophisticated matter than you know, a
a kind of number theory about something that seems
to correspond to justice. It, it's, it's, it's really
a deployment of, of uh principles arrived at after
some empirical investigation of the field.
So another thing that uh at least modern scientists
uh care about and are interested in is explanation
of course. And uh Aristotle thought about different kinds
of explanation and modern scientists tend to favor mechanistic
explanations, but there's also for example, teleological explanation. So
uh how did uh Aristotle look uh at those
different kinds of explanations? How did they look, for
example, at the relationship between mechanistic and teleological explanations?
Great question, one of my, my favorite things to
talk about. Um So I I think there is
an enormous confusion in the, in the history of
philosophy and, and really the history of science about
the relationship between mechanistic or mechanical explanations and teleological
explanations. And a lot of it has to do
with, with what we mean by mechanistic explanations. Um
So first of all, it should be pointed out
that Aristotle wrote probably the first systematic treatise on
mechanics called the Mechanical Problems. And it employs exactly
this methodology of science. I've just been describing some
people think it's written by an early member of
his school or somebody a little bit later. But
the interesting thing about it is that it embodies
Aristotle's Philosophy of Science as he expresses it in
the posterior analytics better than any other work of
Aristotle that, that we have. And it was an
enormously influential text we can demonstrate, for example, its
direct influence on Descartes. OK. So he wrote the
first, the earliest, the most systematic work on mechanical
explanations. OK, explanations of mechanical problems. All right. But
this is not often read and he's not often
credited with this. And usually what we do is
is build up some kind of history of science
that says, well, Aristotle was interested in in final
causes and teleological explanations and forms and these kind
of qualitative things. And he wasn't at all interested
in in a matter and motion and the kind
of things that the later later came to the
fore in the scientific revolution of the 17th century.
So a lot of people will just lazily define
a mechanistic explanation as being one that only depends
on uh matter and motion or something like that.
So the first thing to realize is that Aristotle
causality, you know, his, his theory of causality is
that we need complete explanations that involve all the
kind of causes relevant to a certain phenomenon. And
so he certainly believes that an important cause is
motion. What first moved the thing? That's one of
his four causes. Second one of his four causes
is the material cause. OK. So it's, it's rather
odd to oppose Aristotle to material explanations when he
is the one that invented the idea of material
explanations. In fact, I've written an article that shows
he invented the term material that wasn't used even
by the supposed materialist predecessors, like democrats didn't use
the term material neither did empedocles, neither did Amex
Aristotle invented the term material and used it for
a certain kind of explanation for the first time
later, so called materialist explanations are Aristotelian in this
respect. But what he thinks is that if we're,
if we're explaining some phenomenon, then we need to
explain the material involved, what moved it, what form
uh the things take and what its end or
purpose or function is now returning to mechanistic explanations
or mechanical explanations. What are they? Well, let's start
with mechanical explanations. OK. These are based and, and
the most simple of these would be explaining the
simple machines, OK, an incline plane, uh pulleys levers,
things like this. Right now, all of these things,
you can't begin explaining them without giving some kind
of end or purpose. So it makes an inclined
plane, makes carrying weight up uh uh up a
slope easier. Um The lever makes moving heavy objects
easier, the the lever and fulcrum and so on.
Uh So there's no explanation of these until we
say what they're able to do. And then we
described the form that they're in, you know, that
you need a fulcrum that you need uh an
object of a certain length and so forth. And
then we bring in material things. Well, it needs
to be rigid and it needs these, these other
kinds of qualities and we bring in a mover.
Um YOU know, somebody needs to depress the lever
or whatever. OK. And so I can't find any
so called mechanistic explanation or explanation of anything mechanistic
that doesn't involve all of these causes. OK. I,
I don't think there's any such thing as a
mechanistic explanation that doesn't involve them in jars or
anyone else. And so we're all sort of using
Aristotle's theory of causality to explain this. And there
are people that would like to sort of reduce
it and say, well, we don't, we don't need
the, the final causes anymore. We don't need the
formal causes. But I just, I just don't think
that's, that's the case. So there is certainly no
opposition in Aristotle's philosophy between mechanical or mechanistic explanations
and teleological explanations. And I don't think there are
anywhere else. So all mechanistic explanations are teleological. Now,
on the other side of it, Aristotle would be
the last person to accept a merely teleological explanation
of something which would be to just say what
it's good or end is what he's really interested
in is what, what's the mechanism that makes all
of that possible? Like how do these parts relate
to each other? Such that this this end is
realized so largely what his philosophy is like. His
biology is describing the mechanisms that make vital functions
like reproduction, growth, uh nutrition, uh perception, self motion,
even thinking, what are the mechanisms that make those
things possible? Um And if you take those out,
you, you, you, you, you getting rid of all
of Aristotle's explanations. So there is this this later
polemical dialectic that opposes the two and says one
is superior to the other. But it's, it's just
absolute nonsense in terms of explanation. Uh We we,
we, we need all of these causes in any
particular explanation. And there's no phenomenon that we can
explain without it. I mean, take, take the the
most famous early modern example, something like a clock,
right? You cannot explain a clock unless you want
to talk about the function of keeping time. OK?
And the mechanism is completely oriented and designed every
aspect of the mechanism is to bring about that.
And only that end. And so try to explain
a clock without talking about the end AAA robot
that walks across my desk, I can't explain anything
about it. It's a pure mechanism, but I can't
explain anything about it unless I begin with saying,
well, the purpose of it is to simulate a
thing like walking, like stepping or something. And then
I give the mechanism to explain that, but it
begins with the end. So there are no explanations
of mechanical phenomena without teleological explanations. And my conception
of mechanistic explanations are that they are explanations modeled
on mechanical explanations. So we have this real science
of mechanics and then we have other attempts to
give explanations like mechanics in other fields like biology.
OK. So biomechanical explanations and these are mechanistic in
the sense that they try to describe the mechanisms,
including the material for movers and everything that bring
about certain biological functions or an
Yeah, I, I imagine that perhaps one of the
reasons why maybe modern scientists, I, I mean, by
modern scientists, I'm referring mostly to the contemporary ones.
I'm, I don't think that probably scientists from the
16th 17th century who wouldn't be aware of how
important these different kinds of explanation coming from Aristotle
would be. But reps, they have not read much
philosophy, the contemporary ones. But also when they hear
about things like the theology, they probably immediately think
of religion or something like that.
Well, yes, I mean, there is enormous confusion, of
course, caused by the intermediary history and teleology. One
of the big purposes of teleology in the early
modern era was to support uh what was at
the time called natural theology. The idea that we
can even sort of prove God's existence by examining
these phenomenon. What do we find? We find that
all these ends come about by these very elaborate
mechanisms and these mechanisms are simple to our mechanical
objects. So for, for one thing, we've got to,
we've got to discover that and then, and then
we'll realize sort of the glory of God and
kind of intelligent design, creationism. And uh and, and
second, we have these nice and more uh complete
explanations of the phenomena. Now, um Aristotle doesn't accept
any of that stuff about God because his concept
of God is totally different and he is totally
opposed to an intelligent design, creationist concept of God,
uh which Plato had. But Aristotle totally, uh totally
rejected. But because that was taken over and used
so extensively, then people think, oh, well, the whole
purpose of teleology is really not to do something
scientific. It's to prove the existence of God. But
if we're, if we're just talking about explanations, ok,
then we need teleological explanations. As far as I
can tell, there aren't explanations that don't involve teleology
at some level. But we do need to, we
do it, we do need to separate it out
and, and make the relevant distinctions by what we
mean by God, similar thing, what we mean by
soul. Uh You know, there's a lot of confusion
because of the intermediary, history of the concept of
soul or in ethics. You know, virtue, people have
these concepts of virtue that it's like something that,
you know, something in Christian ethics or something. And
you have to do, do some work to say
no, let's go back to what the original notion
is and it ends up being quite different.
So another thing that you wrote about is how
Aristotle approached or thought about the meaning of life.
Could you tell us about that? I mean, what
is the meaning of life or?
Right. OK. Yeah, you, you really asked the big
questions, don't you Ricardo? Um So, you know, and
of course, I'm giving Aristotle's approach to the meaning
of life. And, you know, nowadays, every philosopher worth
their ASA has to have a view on the
meaning of life. Uh So I have a colleague
that he's just started a course on the meaning
of life. And of course, it's the most popular,
you know, new course at U CS D. Everybody
wants to, you know, oh, I can, I can
go figure out the meaning of life by, by
taking this. And I, I contributed to this extraordinary
um anthology that took something like 30 philosophers from
antiquity down to like Camus or something and, and,
and explains what each of their views are on
the meaning of life. So I think, I think,
you know, Aristotle is really a special philosopher in
this context because he's, he's really the first one
to directly and sort of systematically and philosophically approach
this issue. And he does in, in two, in
two different ways that correspond to two different meanings
of the term meaning, you know, two different senses
of the term meaning of life. So one of
them is, you know, sort of what we mean
when we use the term life, what are we
talking about? He has a very specific and careful
method of figuring that out for one thing. And
then the second is that by meaning of life,
we often mean something like the end or purpose
of life. Like why go on and what, what
makes it worthwhile and that sort of thing. And
he also has a very methodical, careful approach to
that issue and his approach to these two different
aspects of the problem with the meaning of life
are interrelated. So on, on the first one about,
you know, what do we mean by life? His
answer is that, well, we mean the different things
that living things can do so to be alive
is to be able to do certain things to
have a certain function. So we, we think that
plants are alive because they can reproduce and they
can use nutrition and they can grow and that
sort of thing. And, and we can actually talk
about what's good and bad for plants themselves, not
in relation to humans or other animals but themselves.
So a gardener can tell you what's good for
this plant or a botanist can tell you what's
good for this plant in terms of what kind
of soil is good, what kind of, how much
water, how much light, how much shade and so
on. And that's because these living things have these
ends or functions. And he thinks that animals uh
are basically like superpowered plants, they too reproduce. Uh
THEY use nutrition, they grow just like plants, but
they also additionally have have other powers or functions
like uh perception or sensation and moving themselves around
in space. And so we can again talk to
biologists or zoologists or veterinarians or pet owners or
whatever. And they can tell us what's good for
these, these animals in terms of the functions, they
have not just the plant like functions, but also
the animal like functions. So they're not doing well
if they can't move themselves around in space. For
example, if they're confined to a tiny cage or
something, or if there's something wrong with their ability
to perceive or sense or it's mostly they're sensing
things that cause them pain. Then we think that's,
that's bad for animals. And then humans again are
like superpowered animals or plants that have all of
those plant and animal capabilities. But additionally, the ability
to use language and reason. So what we mean
by life, what we mean by plant life is
reproduction, nutrition, growth. What we mean by by animal
life is sensation and self movement. And what we
mean by human life is something like um reason
use of language, rationality. Now, when we move to
the to the other dimension of this question, the
end or purpose of life, then it is related
to this meaning of life. So the end or
purpose of life for a plant just is the
the flourishing of those functions that they're capable of.
So they're capable of nutrition and growth. So we
say that they're doing well when they're literally flourishing,
throwing out shoots and flowers, fructifying that sort of
thing. And we say that animals are living a
good life when they're having a lot of pleasure
and they're moving around a lot and that sort
of thing. And for humans, the meaning of life
though will be activities related to their special capability
of reason or language. And so ultimately, for Aristotle,
um tho those other things, those plant like and
animal like capabilities are also important to our happiness
and to our, to our overall end. But most
important for that is some kind of use of
reason. So he his entire theory of virtue and
what's excellent or good about human beings has to
do with the activities of reason. And the and
the highest most meaningful uh life you can live
according to Aristotle. Perhaps not surprisingly, philosopher comes to
the conclusion that the most meaningful best thing you
can do is philosophy. Um BECAUSE it is, it
is the exercise of this animal plant, but human
capability that this most human capability that we have
and that allows us to do all of these
extraordinary things. So the the the meaning of life
is um tied first, we establish the meaning of
life by what we mean by it. And then,
and then we, we relate our own purpose to
uh to, to this very meaning. And you know,
11 last thing on this is that um you
know, Aristotle's definition of a human being as a
rational animal, you know, I I think it's, there's
a lot going for it and it survived. I
mean, basically, basically the way we, um, classify our
species. Homo sapiens, you know, wise humans is due
to this definition of Aristotle. Um, I mean, I
think, I, I, I think we need to revise
the name of the species because I think we're
sort of like putting on these errors to call
ourselves. Oh, we're the wise hominids or you, especially
when we say Homo sapiens sapiens, you know, and
we sort of double it like we're, we're really
the wise ones. And I there's proposals for changing
the name of the species to something more descriptive,
like, you know, homo terminator or something like that,
you know, and because we drive other species into
extinction and this is the sort of role that
we play or other things. But um, it's why,
why do we use that name for the species?
Well, because that is what is distinctive about this
life form. And so that is where the meaning
of our lives must come from in, in, in
Aristotle's view. And so we, we name the whole
species. It might be kind of aspirational, but it's,
it's because that's what our, that's what our end
is. That's what we're trying to be. I know.
And so we should think of Homo sapiens is
not that we're all wise or that we're all
intelligent, but that's, that's, that's what we should, that's
what we should become. That's what, that's what would
give our lives a true human meaning.
So, before we get into the critics. Let me
just ask you about one more topic. Uh Aristotle
related here. I mean, many things we could talk
about here, of course, but we have to try
to keep it a little bit shorter. No, no,
no, no worries. But I, I would like to
ask you and particularly since, uh I commented earlier
about uh how people think about uh the theology
nowadays and so on. Um How did Aristotle look
at the relationship between biology and theology?
Uh Well, this is a very good question. It,
it actually ties in several of the earlier questions
that you asked. You're very good at, at, at,
at doing that. Um So one thing is that,
I mean, they are related um and this, you
might think is problematic from what I was saying
earlier about kind prohibiting kind crossing explanations or domain
crossing explanations because the domain of theology and the
domain of biology are presumably uh separate. And so
they should have different principles uh in each that
explain the unique phenomenon in each and they, and
they really, you might think shouldn't cross over and
they don't cross over in the obvious way. And
that I think some people would like to read
Aristotle is saying, which is that, you know, theology
tells us that God uh created an intelligently designed
all of the animals and plants. And so the
explanation of those phenomena have to do with theological
explanations. Ultimately, Aristotle totally rejects that picture, which by
the way, because it gets rid of nature, it
turns every thing into an artifact of a creator
God and eliminate the idea of nature. Whereas Aristotle
has this idea that, that uh biological entities are
natural things. And by natural, he means they haven't,
they have internal principles of rest of motion, of
their uh self-organization of their self movement and so
on. So that being said, uh he does believe
there's a connection and it's because he believes there
is one continuous scale. And so this also gets
back in another way to the question of the
unity of science. There's basically one continuous scale that
goes from inanimate objects through plants, animals, human beings
and gods. And there's one order of nature that
embraces all of those, all of those entities. And
so we actually need some principles that we derive
from studying animals, like about their reproduction, about their
motion, even even from studying plants, about their reproduction.
We need, we need some things uh to explain
some of those phenomena by appealing to principles that
are essentially theological in nature. Uh So, in order
to, for Aristotle's account, ultimately, of why we reproduce
and even why we move it all has to
do with this divine principle of reason that we're
trying to imitate. And we do that in various
ways, plants do it by reproducing things of their
kind and sort of creating these cycles that resemble
the cycles that the, the stars move in animals
do it by their self motion and their use
of perception and humans do it by their use
of reason. But at the same time, Aristotle thinks
that, you know, how do we explain stuff about
the gods? Well, he uses principles from his account
of animal motion in order to explain things about
his God, which he conceives of as a living
thing. So it is a kind of animal and
it's even a thinking thing and it has to
have pleasure and it, and uh this sort of
thing, I think it's ridiculous to have an idea
of a God that doesn't enjoy what it's doing
and or or doesn't do anything. So, um but
in order to explain the activities of His God
and what and how His God enjoys pleasure and
so forth and the kind of motion that that
God causes. He falls back on some biological principles.
So he thinks that the stars are these divine
entities that are gods, but we can only explain
how they move in perfect circles by referring to
how any kind of animal motion works. So he
refers to principles from the beginning of his on
the motion of animals in, in order to explain
um how these divine entities, the stars move in
his work on the heaven. Uh So there are
principles taken from biology to explain theological facts. And
there are theological principles utilized to explain biological facts.
And I think we can keep all of this
straight and not just mash the, the, the, the
two together, they are two different sciences, but they
are two different theoretical sciences. And there is no
problem with them utilizing principles uh from one in
the case that they could be tied directly to
the phenomena being explained.
So let's talk a little bit about democ then.
So these democracies of ab there a guy who
was he? Exactly. And what was he interested in?
Um Well, yeah, he's, he's a guy from, from
ABD um AAA famous famously sort of backwater and
backwards kind of place. So um he um Aristotle
calls him his most important predecessor by far in
the field of natural philosophy and he's including Plato
in that discussion. So Aristotle, Aristotle actually says no
one, no one other than Democrats has touched on
these issues in natural philosophy more than superficially. OK.
Only Democrats has democrats, democritus is like Aristotle's only
real predecessor in the field of natural philosophy. Somewhat
similar to the compliment Darwin paid to Aristotle when
he said all of my predecessors are schoolboys compared
to Aristotle. Aristotle basically said all of my predecessors
are schoolboys compared uh to Democrats, but he has
a very mixed um reputation in part based on
the fact that Plato never mentions his name. OK?
And the explanation for that seems to be if
you really hate someone and you really want to
deny their influence on your own thinking. Then the
last thing you do is cite them in any
kind of footnote. Uh And you just pretend like
they don't, they don't exist. But another problem is
that Democrats became this sort of ma associated with
materialist, hedonist, empiricist philosophy that was for various reasons
opposed to Aristotle and Plato and then eventually condemned
and, and, and, and as it was a, as
you took one of its biggest influences on epicurean,
then it was a actually um stifled. And then,
and, and, and Christian authorities tried to stamp it
out and actually burned all of the books of
Democrats and other materialist philosophers. And this is part
of the explanation for why certain works have survived
and certain others haven't. So none of democritus's works
have established intact. There is no equivalent of the
Aristotle corpus for Democrats. There's only reports about his
physics, basically stemming from Aristotle and then a bunch
of uh fragments of his ethics. But you know,
he is treated sometimes called a Pres Socratic philosopher,
which is a particularly inept expression uh for him
because he was a contemporary of Socrates, unlike Socrates
who wrote nothing, Democritus wrote more than anybody before
him and basically more than anybody before Plato is
Socrates or Aristotle on a vast variety of topics,
mainly physics and uh ethics, but also poetics and
culture and music in general. Mathematics. Uh AND so
on. Uh So that's, that's who he was. And
he had a huge influence on later philosophy, beginning
with Aristotle. But then especially in the hellenistic age,
his reputation seems to have just grown and grown
to the point where he was being uh imitated
by other kinds of philosophers. And almost, I mean,
basically every philosophical school in the hellenistic age is
directly influenced by uh democrats. So that's, that's who
he is. It takes, it takes work to recover
and, and, and appreciate this influence and especially tricky
working with fragments. We don't have texts like we
do with, with Plato and Aristotle. But you know,
if you ask Aristotle or you ask anybody in
the hellenistic age, democritus is one of the most
important or maybe the most important ancient philosopher.
Uh And so of course, we tend to associate
him a lot to cosmology. But uh and you
also mentioned ethics there. But what other kinds of
questions did you work on?
Well, as you say, he's, he's most famous probably
for his, for his cosmology, but really for the
invention of atom is OK. So the theory uh
that reality consists of atoms and void. OK? That
uh sensible qualities like hot and cold, red and
green, uh bitter and sweet and so forth um
are all a matter of the way that atoms
are moving in a void and are juxtaposed and
rearranged and collide with each other. And a conception
of a human being as an aggregate of atoms
and void. And all of the sensible objects or
external objects, also consisting of atoms and void and
trying to come up with explanations about how the
phenomena, you know, the the as as we perceive
them can be explained according to these, these interactions
of uh Adams and void. Now, he applied that
theory into a vast range of natural sciences beginning
with things, you know, uh elemental physics and what
we would consider like chemistry and that sort of
thing, but also explanations of plants, uh animals, meteorological,
uh phenomena, astronomical phenomena, um but also human beings
and human civilization and the development of um uh
the, the, the, the development of human technologies and
civilizations and things like that. So he has, he
has an all embracing naturalistic account that starts with
the fundamental level level of atoms and void and
ends with the level of human institutions like political
and religious institutions and so forth and, and by
means of, of one ideological account, trying to explain
it all. And so obviously, that's inspirational for various
kinds of materialist, atomist um uh systems of explanation
and alternatives to Platonic Aristotelian uh metaphysics. Um But
then he not only contributed to ethics and I
can say more about that if you like, but
especially social political philosophy. And so one of the
main things I love about Democrats is that he
is one of the only promo democratic philosophers. OK.
And one of the only ones that any promo
democratic statement of his has survived. So, you know,
uh Plato is, you know, hated democracy, hated democratic
freedoms and, and democracy. Socrates was a critic of
democracy. Um Aristotle considered democracy a corrupt form of
government. Yes, it's the least bad, but it is
a corrupt and perverse uh form of government. But
democritus was pro democratic and had a, a notion
of autonomy. In fact, in one of his fragments,
he invents the notion of autonomy, talks about applying
a law to yourself, to your own soul. And
he says that um that uh freedom in a
democratic government is, is much better than so called
prosperity or Monia under dynastic and, you know, kind
of tyrannical rule than uh freedom is better than
slavery. And so, uh he's, he's a actual pro
democratic theorist and that is so extremely rare and
people don't, don't realize this. They think, oh the
Greeks, they're all, they're all pro democracy. We don't
have any pro democracy works to figure out what
arguments people were making in favor of democracy and
antiquity. We have to reverse engineer it from their
critics like Plato Aristotle, the old oligarch and so
forth or look for tiny fri of pro democratic
writers like Democrats. And he wrote about democracy. He
wrote about the problems of Democrats holding uh offices.
He wrote about the relations between rich and poor.
And he has this amazing social political philosophy that,
that is intertwined with his ethical philosophy. And also
with his theory of education and his theory of
the history of culture and civilization, which as I
said before is also tied in to his naturalistic
uh theory of explanation and the other sciences.
So tell us just a little bit about his
uh ethics then. So what did the, what were
his spots on the the topic?
Well, um right, so I talk about the major
areas that he's had an influence in and that
we have fragments that show him practicing this kind
of philosophy. So one thing is, you know, we
talk about new dyin theories of philosophy uh of,
of ethics, right, centered on the happiness or success
or prosperity of the agent. And he uh like
Plato and Aristotle used this term eudaimonia and seems
to have conceived of, of ethics as a means
of bringing about eudaimonia. Um He also engaged in
what we call virtue theory, theorizing what the virtues
are uh and relating human goods to these kinds
of virtues. He also like Socrates and Plato and
to AAA slightly lesser extent, Aristotle had an influence
on and was one of the in exceptional figures
of intellectualism. So the the the conception of the
virtues and ultimately, of human happiness is having something
to do with knowledge uh or understanding. And finally,
the most important aspect I think of, of, of
hellenistic ethics. He conceived of ethics as being therapeutic
as having a therapeutic dimension that analogous and he's
the first person to make this analogy, medicine takes
care of the ills and diseases of the body.
Wisdom takes care of the um ills and diseases
and troubles of the mind or the soul and
that these are in parallel. And so he has
a Eudaimonic virtue, theoretic, intellectual and therapeutic uh set
of ethics. And the uh and another important thing
to realize here and it connects to what I
was saying about democracy is that he has this
notion of autonomy, which because Plato and Aristotle and
Socrates are also anti democracy, they do not have
concepts of autonomy. And they think that we need
to instill virtue by uh punishments and rewards and
political artifices. OK. Whereas uh Democrats thinks you can
use exhortation and reasoning and education in order to
make people kind of self governing and bring about
their own happiness and bring about their own virtues.
And that it's better to do it this way
than to impose it top down through uh political
structure. So this is another enormously, you know, resonant
part of his, of his philosophy. And, and one
that despite all the enthusiasm for Plato's Socrates and
uh Aristotle's ethics, if we care about democracy and
autonomy, we should, we should care a little bit
more about this, this view of, of democritus.
So let me ask you now, a little bit
about greco-roman philosophy. So how do you look at
the relationship between Greek and Roman philosophy? And why
do you think that we tend to sort of
blend them together a little bit when we mention
or use this term or a term like greco-roman
philosophy?
Well, I I'm glad that that term is being
adopted and um used and I think it is
the correct description. I mean, there's a tendency earlier
to just describe it as philosophy, but we have
these other wisdom traditions that we should probably also
describe as philosophy such as uh wisdom traditions written
in Chinese or written in Sanskrit, you know, Indian
philosophy. Um And so I use the term Greco
Roman in order to indicate, you know, I don't
again, I don't think the term ancient philosophy is
adequate because these are there's other ancient philosophy. So
I use the term Greco Roman to indicate that
I'm working on a certain kind of um ancient
philosophy. Now, we might just call it Greek philosophy
because it's not clear that there is any unique
Roman contribution to, to it. Uh It's largely borrowing
and recasting and reconfiguring and eclectically uh combining and
essentially we're talking about Greek philosophy. So another way
to describe this would be Greek philosophy, Roman philosophy
is Greek Greek philosophy. But there are certain interesting
things that happen. For example, Lucretius's recasting of Greek
philosophy into Latin. His combination of democ democrat is
and epicurean into a poetic, epic poetic form. You
know, all, all of that's very interesting and very
important for the history of Latin literature, um other
combinations of earlier Greek philosophy that you kind of
wouldn't, wouldn't have in their pure form, like the
way Cicero combines academic philosophy, so actually kind of
academic skepticism, but also combining it with, with stoic
uh ethics or perhaps even more dramatically. Uh Seneca
kind of popularizer and exhorted um of philosophy but,
and, and definitely a card carrying stoic but he
incorporates epicurean and democracy and aspects uh into his
philosophy quite explicitly. Um And so I think what's,
what's interesting about the Roman phase is sort of
seeing how we can combine these ideas that are
in the Greek phase, these warring schools that, you
know, you sign up for one of these schools
and you attack everybody in the other school and,
and what we get in the Roman phase is
this more kind of decadent? Well, let's, let's combine
them and let's let's take insights that are useful
from all of them. Um So that, that to
me is essentially what's going on with Roman philosophy
is an adaptation of Greek philosophy and a and
a sort of mixing uh of it a remixing
of it in, in ways that have, have proven
to be enormously influential. And I think, you know,
largely this fanatical revival of stoicism uh that we're
seeing is largely because of the, the, the literary
greatness of uh Seneca and, and, and, and that
really still speaks to students. And so in a,
in a way you can use Roman philosophy to
get people interested in Greek uh philosophy, the the
Romans of course themselves thought, you know, if you're
serious about philosophy, you do Greek and there was
large bilingual movement because, you know, you want, you
want to be an educated person and not just
in philosophy, but science certainly, but uh but also
culture and, and poetics and so forth. You, you
needed Greek but they um they developed it and
extended in certain ways. Another thing is survival of
texts. Many less, there's actually a less of a
corpus of Roman type. You might think we have
a lot more Roman philosophy than we do Greek.
It, it really isn't like that, but the ones
we have are very precious and they often often
preserve fragments of earlier work. So that's, that's another
thing is mining Latin texts and Roman philosophy to,
to get back to the original Greek ideas.
Well, I guess it was not by chance that
during most of our academic history, uh I mean,
since the very beginning of universities and all of
that and until very, very, very recently, historically speaking,
um people uh people had to learn to read
and write Latin and Greek,
right? Well, and, and especially Latin. So actually, here's
another crucial thing about philosophy written in Latin. And
as it were Roman philosophy is that, you know,
an educated person throughout the middle ages throughout the
renaissance and basically throughout the early modern period had
to be able to read and write and work
in Latin. OK. And I mean, Greek, yes, to
some extent in some places and at sometimes, but
definitely Latin. And so the great, a lot of
the great uh early modern philosophers are themselves writing
in Latin and they were their own education was
in Latin. And so we actually find that, that
Roman philosophy because they were, they were cutting their
teeth on Seneca and Cicero, that their conception of
ancient philosophy is largely what we find in Seneca
and Cicero. So it's largely hellenistic philosophy and you
know, it, it, it surprises people that, you know,
Kant. Why isn't he more directly referring to Plato
and Aristotle, for example? Well, because the, the text
that he was steeped in are the, the Latin
based ones. And so he's talking about epicureans and
stoicism. So that's a, that's another crucial thing about
Roman philosophy is because of the accident of what
languages were being used. And, and, and the preeminence
of, of Latin that Roman philosophy becomes ever more
important because that's just the text you read in
order to train yourself in the language, you needed
to do anything.
Yeah. No, I, I guess, yeah. No, go ahead.
Sorry. No, no, no. And, and, and so you're,
you're, you're very right that, that the, this idea
that education consists of number one, learning Latin and
then number two, if you're really deep getting in
into Greek is a lot of the, the reason
why, um, you know, that, why, why these philosophies
have had the influence that they've had and the
importance that they continue to have.
Yeah, I guess that it's not very often that
it crosses our minds that until at least the
19th century m most or many, or even all
of the great thinkers, the scientists, the philosophers, when
they mentioned, uh, I don't know, ancient Greeks and
Romans, they were actually reading the original texts in
Latin and Greek. Right.
That's right. That's right. That's exactly correct.
So, uh and of course, we've already mentioned here
uh in passage, the fact that greco-roman philosophy have
a huge influence on the history of philosophy and
science. But since you also mentioned that and correctly,
that we have other philosophical traditions like the Indian
tradition, the Chinese tradition, the Persian tradition and others.
Uh uh uh uh How much inf influence influential
do you think that greco-roman philosophy was when it
comes to the history of philosophy and science specifically?
Well, um it might surprise you, my approach to
this is, is less in looking at the history
and the past, then this is how I think
of sort of the future of philosophy. So, you
know, to me, a large part of the future
of philosophy and particularly the future of the history
of philosophy is going to be getting better understanding
or maybe I should just say understanding because it's
so weak at present that we can hardly hardly
just hope to better it until we get more
of an understanding of it. But understanding and integrating
and comparing Chinese and Indian philosophy with Greek and
Greco Roman uh philosophy I think is the future
of philosophy and the future of the history of
philosophy. And this requires um difficult skills, which is
why it's so hard to practice starting with the
linguistic skills of actually being able to read classical
Chinese or what's even more difficult because they don't
teach it in Indian high schools to learn Sanskrit
or um Poli. OK. So, um but it's incredible
to think that there are these enormous ancient philosophies
divided into all kinds of different schools and with
their own disputes and with their own concepts of
logic and epistemology and physics and so forth. I
mean, we obsess over tiny scraps, you know, whatever
we can, we can see with satellite telemetry on,
on Charred scrolls coming out of herculaneum if we
can get one or two characters or a word.
Meanwhile, there are thousands of Chinese and Sanskrit texts
that have never been edited critically. Um uh YOU
know, much less translated, much less commented upon, much
less um uh brought into communication with and compared
with our Western philosophical tradition, Greco Roman tradition. So
I expect all our, our philosophy to be really
enhanced and improved and diversified by um taking these
into, into account. Um And so I, I think
that's the future of it. Now, in terms of,
in terms of the past, there's some questions to
be answered about, you know, the possibility of direct
communication between these traditions. And I, I have written
some stuff critical of the idea that uh for
example, uh Greek pianism, pian skepticism is actually just
a form of Buddhism as has been argued in
a, in a recent monograph by Christopher Duck with
published by Princeton University Press. And there are other
people that think that Buddhism had such a direct
influence that we should be as an historical matter
of fact, attributing forms of Greek skepticism to this.
I don't think that any of that's been proven,
I would be the first person to be, to
be excited and acknowledge if we could find those.
I don't think that's, that's been figured out yet,
but that's an example of the kind of work
that needs to be done much more carefully, but
more interesting than that than actually looking at historical,
the possibility of, of historical connections between them is
comparing the ideas, OK, comparing them and, and especially
looking for different ways of conceiving of the world
because we have a lot of philosophical problems. OK?
That, that still need to be worked out. I
mean, a lot of them are basically in the
same condition as when Aristotle explained what the problem
is to us. And we have warring camps that
have developed quite intricate systems on both sides. But
to, to some extent what we need is new
ways of conceiving of the problems themselves, new approaches
to similar problems and, you know, new concepts, new
ideas, new configurations of thinking. And so I, to
me, it's not as much actually about the, the
past as the few of philosophy. Once we get
good enough, get out of the pathetic state of,
of linguistic incompetence so that these are just sort
of isolated islands of, of, of philosophy and start,
you know, bringing them together into a true global
world philosophy where we can, we can compare these
ideas.
Yeah. And, and I guess, I mean, on the
show, I've talked of course, with many different scientists,
particularly social scientists and even more specifically, people who
work on cultural evolution. And I guess that this
would be a very great way of uh bringing
together the humanities, particularly philosophy and the sciences because
it's also very interesting to study and understand a
little bit better where for example, differences in cognition
between uh the in the West stem from and
how those manifest in different philosophies, for example.
Yes, absolutely. And you know, g er Lloyd has
done tremendous work on this and really, really um
for the Western audience or people, people reading books
in English, shown a model of doing this but
also shown why it's important because the similarities are
important, why they came up with similar things. And
in some cases, the exact same thing atom is
for example, was indigenously developed in in India, in
the Naia school and in other materialist schools and
possibly forms of atoms in in Chinese philosophy. So
that's very interesting why you know, was were they
responding to the same kinds of problems or different
problems but coming up with the same uh solution.
But then of course, even more important the differences,
different ways of looking uh at these things. And
so yes, in, in any account of cultural evolution
and the true global history of science is going
to have to take all of this into account.
And that really means philosophy because philosophy is where
sort of all of these various texts of different
kinds of, of, of science are, are, are deposited
and and and kind of remain in these traditions
just like in, in, in the Greek tradition, they're
conceived of, you know, all, all of these sciences
and everything are basically ways of doing philosophy, their
wisdom traditions. I mean, and so maybe, maybe this
is the the final point about this is that
there are people that think that philosophy is a
Greek word and that it was invented on a
street corner in Milius and you know, by Thales
and at a certain date, a certain Tuesday in
the sixth century or whatever. And that we shouldn't
use the term philosophy for these other traditions because
they didn't use that Greek term. And I, I
used to think, you know, that's just ridiculous because
what they're doing is philosophy. But I'm starting to
think that, well, there's actually a wider phenomenon here
of, of wisdom traditions and maybe philosophy is a
specific approach to wisdom traditions. And by the way,
Democrats never used the term philosophy. He did use
the term wisdom. And there's a way of thinking
of him as a sort of person working in
a wisdom tradition instead of instead of a philosophy
tradition.
So uh I have then one last question that
I would like to ask you, I know that
you're, you are working with uh some other people
like Donald R, Ruford and Enrico Per Giao on
a translation from Latin to English of an early
modern work by Pierre Gas and the entitled Epicurus
System of Philosophy. So would you like to tell
us about it?
Very good? Yes, I mean, thank you so much
for asking about that. Um This is a work
of early modern philosophy by an important renaissance to
early modern uh figure who's most famous as a
critic of Descartes and arrival of Descartes. He wrote
the fifth set of objections to Descartes meditations. But
he had this goal of, he, he started out
attacking Aristotelian is and Aristotelian logic. But he needed
to get beyond his negative approach to that and
find a system. He thought he could sort of
replace Aristotelian scholasticism with and what he and he
found the solution in ancient Epicurean is really Democrats
and Epicurean, but Epicurean and he develops this system
of philosophy that he calls Epicurus system of philosophy,
the, the Syntagma of Epicurus philosophy. And it basically
consists of, you know, empiricism in epistemology, um atom
is in its physics or metaphysics and hedonism in
its ethics. And this was enormously influential on various
uh other figures like Locke and Hobbes. Uh AND
even Newton. Um And uh in a way, I
think that unlike Descartes, who, you know, nobody tries
to base their science on, you know, personal assurance
of certainty or something like in the meditations. And
nobody takes that seriously anymore. What we take seriously
and kind of the worldview that we have the
modern scientific worldview is this one developed by GSI,
this materialist hedonist empiricist approach. And it's just interesting
that when we look at how it got established,
it seems so modern and everything. And, and so
we go back to the early modern philosophers and
find, well, where, where did they get it and
where they got it was antiquity. OK. They self
consciously developed it from um Epicurus. So I'm just
fascinated with this text. And one other interesting thing
about it is its literary form. So it's, it's
actually an appendix to a gigantic commentary and critical
edition that he did on a Source of Epicurus,
Diogenes Laos's book 10. But in this, his, his
friend said, look, nobody's basically gonna read this. We
need some kind of summary of what this philosophy
is about. And that's what the uh small Syntagma
is. And in it, he says, I'm gonna speak
as epicurus. And so he speaks in the first
person I hold this, I hold that and tries
to elaborate Epicurus's philosophy himself, beginning with his logic
or canonic and then his physics and then his
ethics and gives us this entire system of philosophy
that is supposed to not only be a solid
philosophy coming from antiquity, but to be fully compatible
with the latest scientific developments and give us a
way of conceiving of ourselves and of science. That's
an alternative to the Aristotelian one.
Great. So would you like to tell us where
people can find you and your work on the
internet?
Uh Sure. So I've, I've got a profile up
on this wonderful uh website called Phil People Fill
Papers, which was developed uh by philosophers for philosophers.
All of my publications are available on that. We
also have a website, www.protreptic.info, which has stuff on
the Protreptic project, including the latest version, uh the
most recent version of our reconstruction, but also links
to our essays and that sort of thing. And,
but you can, you can also uh find me
on the U CS D Philosophy Department uh site
or just email me Monte Monte at U CS
d.edu.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
really fun. To talk with you.
Well, and uh my pleasure entirely, Ricardo. Thank you
so much. Those are really, really great questions and
I just love the show. So thank you so
much for doing it.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs calling in Hafid governor. Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz and
La Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes Mark
Smith J Tom Hummel S friends, David Wilson Yasa,
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli
Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi Nale Me, Gary
G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Beto
Lati Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano
Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A
Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw Marie. Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael
Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor, Luke
Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No,
Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Janner Urla. Good
enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom
Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik, Muller Thomas
Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers
Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank
you for all.